CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md, before:

# Contributor Code of Conduct

As contributors and maintainers of this project, and in the interest of
fostering an open and welcoming community, we pledge to respect all people who
contribute through reporting issues, posting feature requests, updating
documentation, submitting pull requests or patches, and other activities.

We are committed to making participation in this project a harassment-free
experience for everyone, regardless of level of experience, gender, gender
identity and expression, sexual orientation, disability, personal appearance,
body size, race, ethnicity, age, religion, or nationality.

Examples of unacceptable behavior by participants include:

* The use of sexualized language or imagery
* Personal attacks
* Trolling or insulting/derogatory comments
* Public or private harassment
* Publishing other's private information, such as physical or electronic
  addresses, without explicit permission
* Other unethical or unprofessional conduct

Project maintainers have the right and responsibility to remove, edit, or
reject comments, commits, code, wiki edits, issues, and other contributions
that are not aligned to this Code of Conduct, or to ban temporarily or
permanently any contributor for other behaviors that they deem inappropriate,
threatening, offensive, or harmful.

By adopting this Code of Conduct, project maintainers commit themselves to
fairly and consistently applying these principles to every aspect of managing
this project. Project maintainers who do not follow or enforce the Code of
Conduct may be permanently removed from the project team.

This Code of Conduct applies both within project spaces and in public spaces
when an individual is representing the project or its community.

Instances of abusive, harassing, or otherwise unacceptable behavior may be
reported by contacting a project maintainer at [INSERT EMAIL ADDRESS]. All
complaints will be reviewed and investigated and will result in a response that
is deemed necessary and appropriate to the circumstances. Maintainers are
obligated to maintain confidentiality with regard to the reporter of an
incident.


This Code of Conduct is adapted from the [Contributor Covenant][homepage],
version 1.3.0, available at https://www.contributor-covenant.org/version/1/3/0/code-of-conduct.html

[homepage]: https://www.contributor-covenant.org

Commit message:

Update CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md in accordance with MP Foundation recommendation

CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md, after:

# Contributor Code of Conduct

As contributors and maintainers of this project, and in the interest of
fostering an open and welcoming community, we pledge to respect all people who
contribute through reporting issues, posting feature requests, updating
documentation, submitting pull requests or patches, and other activities.

We are committed to making participation in this project a harassment-free
experience for everyone, regardless of level of experience, gender, gender
identity and expression, sexual orientation, disability, personal appearance,
body size, race, ethnicity, age, religion, or nationality.

Examples of unacceptable behavior by participants include:

* The use of sexualized language or imagery
* Personal attacks
* Trolling or insulting/derogatory comments
* Public or private harassment
* Publishing other's private information, such as physical or electronic
  addresses, without explicit permission
* Other unethical or unprofessional conduct

Project maintainers have the right and responsibility to remove, edit, or
reject comments, commits, code, wiki edits, issues, and other contributions
that are not aligned to this Code of Conduct, or to ban temporarily or
permanently any contributor for other behaviors that they deem inappropriate,
threatening, offensive, or harmful.

By adopting this Code of Conduct, project maintainers commit themselves to
fairly and consistently applying these principles to every aspect of managing
this project. Project maintainers who do not follow or enforce the Code of
Conduct may be permanently removed from the project team.

This Code of Conduct applies both within project spaces and in public spaces
when an individual is representing the project or its community.

Instances of abusive, harassing, or otherwise unacceptable behavior may be
reported by contacting a project maintainer at conduct@materialsproject.org. All
complaints will be reviewed and investigated by a Materials Project staff member
and will result in a response that
is deemed necessary and appropriate to the circumstances.

Project maintainers and Materials Project staff members are obligated to maintain confidentiality with regard to the reporter of an incident to the extent 
possible by law and institutional policy. Community members should be aware that Materials Project staff members are subject to Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory's [harassment and discrimination policies](https://diversity.lbl.gov/harassment-discrimination-policies/), which require that reports of sexual violence or harassment (as defined in the policy) be reported to the institution.

This Code of Conduct is adapted from the [Contributor Covenant][homepage],
version 1.3.0, available at https://www.contributor-covenant.org/version/1/3/0/code-of-conduct.html

[homepage]: https://www.contributor-covenant.org
