docs/user/key_concepts_overview.md, before:

(key_concepts_overview)=

# Key concepts in atomate2: `Job` & `Flow` `Makers`, `InputSet`, `TaskDocument`, and `Builder`

# Introduction
This tutorial will give you a high-level overview of the key concepts in atomate2, diving into the important features of `Job` and `Flow` makers, as well as `InputSets`, `TaskDocuments`, and `Builders`.

## `Job` and `Flow` makers

`Job` and `Flow` makers are the workhorses of the atomate2 code framework. Their key role is to enable the user to orchestrate and execute a sequence of usually repetitive tasks, processes and manage computational workflows.
To ease the management of such processes, tools like [jobflow](https://github.com/materialsproject/jobflow) can be used. The two essential building blocks of the jobflow-based workflows in atomate2 are `Jobs` and `Flows`.

### Basics

A `Job` is a single computing job, and potentially can take any python function form, given that their inputs and outputs (return values) can be serialized in a JSON format. Jobs are defined using the `@job` decorator.

A `Flow` is a sequential collection of job or other flow objects. The connectivity and also execution order and dependency of the different jobs and flow is decided automatically from the job inputs. The output from one job (`job.output`) can be used as the input for the next one, which will therefore establish a connectivity between these two jobs.
The connectivity between several jobs and flows can be arbitrary, depending on the purpose of the workflow. Flows are usually annotated with the `@dataclass` decorator.

The following figure demonstrates a very general example of a flow (Total flow) consisting of several other flows, that each incorporate several individual jobs or tasks, connected by the respective `job.output`.

![Flow example](../_static/example_flow.png)

`Job` and `Flow` makers come in handy by providing a template schema to set up all kinds of electronic structure calculation and computational chemistry tasks (e.g. chemical bonding analysis, elastic constant calculations, force field applications and many more) and to make it easier to handle and unify output from the various supported software packages (like VASP, phonopy and more). <!--is there a list of supported software on the GitHub pages?-->
Because the job output data is stored in a JSON serializable dict format, it makes it possible to conveniently handle it with so-called `TaskDocuments`.<!--hyperref to TaskDoc?-->

### Technical Aspects

The atomate2 `Job` and `Flow` makers are both dataclasses that inherit from the `Maker` [jobflow](https://github.com/materialsproject/jobflow/blob/main/src/jobflow/core/maker.py) dataclass.
The `Maker` class from jobflow is a base class for constructing the aforementioned `Job` and `Flow` objects and has two main functionalities, that are vital for any inheriting job or flow maker: the `make` function and the functionality to update keyword arguments (kwargs).

```
@dataclass
class Maker(MSONable):
    """
    Base maker (factory) class for constructing :obj:`Job` and :obj:`Flow` objects.
    [...]
    """
    def make(...) -> jobflow.Flow | jobflow.Job:
        """Make a job or a flow - must be overridden with a concrete implementation."""
        raise NotImplementedError
    [...]
    def update_kwargs(...):
```

If one needs to implement a new job or flow maker, it is important to pay attention to the functions that raise an `NotImplementedError`. Functions like the `make` function have to be overridden for each specific job or flow maker with its own specific functionalities.

### Examples

An example for a `Job Maker` is the `LobsterMaker`:

```
@dataclass
class LobsterMaker(Maker):
    """
    LOBSTER job maker.
    [...]
    """
    name: str = "lobster"
    [...]

    @job(output_schema=LobsterTaskDocument, data=[CompleteCohp, LobsterCompleteDos])
    def make(
        self,
        wavefunction_dir: str | Path = None,
        basis_dict: dict | None = None,
    ) -> LobsterTaskDocument:
        """
        Run a LOBSTER calculation.
        [...]
        """
```
This class incorporates [LOBSTER](http://cohp.de/) specific input and output data, i.e. the `wavefunction_dir` and `basis_dict` as input in `make` that returns the `LobsterMaker`-class specific output as a `TaskDocument`.
As a job maker, this maker will then create jobs to execute the LOBSTER runs and store the output in the `LobsterTaskDocument` format.

In contrast to a job maker, the `make` function of a `Flow Maker` will return a `Flow` object instead of a task document.
As an example we take the `BasePhononMaker` (that can be used in combination with VASP or the various (machine learned) force fields):
```
@dataclass
class BasePhononMaker(Maker, ABC):
    """
    Maker to calculate harmonic phonons with a DFT/force field code and Phonopy.

    [...]
    """

    name: str = "phonon"
    [...]

    def make(...) -> Flow:
```
This maker will return a flow that provides all the necessary steps and subroutines that are needed to complete the phonon calculations.
Oftentimes, such flows then involve dynamic jobs, as e.g. for the phonon calculations, the number of supercells with individual atomic displacements will be decided upon runtime.
In this particular case, the flow maker `BasePhononMaker` is also inheriting from `ABC` (Abstract Base Classes). <!--more comprehensive explanation on ABCs?-->


# InputSet

An `InputSet` is a convenient way to provide a collection of input data for one or more input files as dict-like container. This makes it feasible to handle the input settings for a variety of computational codes, like e.g. VASP, Q-Chem, LAMMPS, CP2K and ABINIT.

## Basics

The [pymatgen](https://github.com/materialsproject/pymatgen) class `InputSet` is a core class to manage and write the input files for the several computational codes to a file location the user specifies.
There are predefined "recipes" for generating `InputSets` tailored to specific tasks like structural relaxation or the band structure calculation and more, that are provided as `InputGenerator` classes.

## Technical Aspects

The `InputSet` objects posses the `write_input()` method that is used to write all the necessary files.

```
class InputSet(MSONable, MutableMapping):
    """
    Abstract base class for all InputSet classes. InputSet are dict-like
    containers for all calculation input data.
    [...]
    """
    [...]
    def write_input(
        self,
        directory: str | Path,
        make_dir: bool = True,
        overwrite: bool = True,
        zip_inputs: bool = False,
    ):
        """
        Write Inputs to one or more files.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    @classmethod
    def from_directory(cls, directory: str | Path):
        """
        Construct an InputSet from a directory of one or more files.
        [...]
        """
        raise NotImplementedError(f"from_directory has not been implemented in {cls.__name__}")
```

It is important to note that all `InputSet` must implement the `from_directory` classmethod.

## Examples

A nice example for an input set is the `VaspInputSet`:

```
class VaspInputSet(InputSet):
    """
    A class to represent a set of VASP inputs.
    [...]
    """
    [...]

    def write_input(self,..., potcar_spec: bool = False) -> None:
        """
        Write VASP input files to a directory.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    @staticmethod
    def from_directory(...) -> VaspInputSet:
        """
        Load a set of VASP inputs from a directory.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    @property
    def is_valid(self) -> bool:
        """
        Whether the input set is valid.
        [...]
        """
```
VASP needs several inputs files (INCAR, POSCAR, POTCAR and KPOINTS) in order to run, which can be written to a directory using the `write_input` method. If needed, only POTCAR.spec instead of the full POTCAR can be written out, that will only contain the pseudopotential names (e.g. Li_sv).
If necessary, it is also possible to specify optional files. The `VaspInputSet` also provides the possibility to check if the constructed input set is valid, to avoid conflicting input setup (e.g. concerning the ISMEAR and KPOINTS settings).

The corresponding input generator is the `VaspInputGenerator`.

# TaskDocument
A `TaskDocument` (TaskDoc for short) is a dictionary object that contains all the information of the respective computational chemistry calculation run.

## Basics

## Technical Aspects

## Examples

# Builder

The `Builder` object is provided by the [maggma](https://github.com/materialsproject/maggma/) toolkit and serves as a data processing step.

## Basics

`Builders` offer an interface for writing data transformations: getting items from a `Store`, processing and manipulating the input data and preparing an output document, as well as updating and adding the processed items to the target store(s).


## Technical Aspects

The `Builder` and `Store` are the core classes of maggma and give the user tools to build data pipelines from different types of data sources.

```
class Builder(MSONable, metaclass=ABCMeta):
    """
    Base Builder class
    At minimum this class should implement:
    get_items - Get items from the sources
    update_targets - Updates the sources with results

    Multiprocessing and MPI processing can be used if all
    the data processing is  limited to process_items
    """
    [...]

    @abstractmethod
    def get_items(self) -> Iterable:
    [...]

    def process_item(self, item: Any) -> Any:
    [...]

    @abstractmethod
    def update_targets(self, items: List):
    [...]
```
The `Builder` class has three main functionalities that are `get_items` to retrieve data from the source store(s), `process_item` to handle the input items and create an output document to be then added to the target store(s) by `update_target`.

## Examples

An atomate2 `Builder` example is the `ElasticBuilder`:
```
class ElasticBuilder(Builder):
    """
    The elastic builder compiles deformation tasks into an elastic document.
    [...]
    """
    [...]

    def get_items(self) -> Generator:
        """
        Get all items to process into elastic documents.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    def process_item(self, tasks: list[dict]) -> list[ElasticDocument]:
        """
        Process deformation tasks into elasticity documents.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    def update_targets(self, items: list[ElasticDocument]) -> None:
        """
        Insert new elastic documents into the elasticity store.
        [...]
        """
        [...]
```

In case of the `ElasticBuilder`, the step of getting all the items that shall be processed involves finding all deformation documents with the same formula.
Then during the data and item processing stage, the deformations will be grouped by their parent structures.
Finally, the processed items are compiled into an ElasticDocument from the group of tasks and the new elastic documents are added to the elasticity store.


#TODO exercises?

Commit message:

adding job maker @job decorator explanation

docs/user/key_concepts_overview.md, after:

(key_concepts_overview)=

# Key concepts in atomate2: `Job` & `Flow` `Makers`, `InputSet`, `TaskDocument`, and `Builder`

# Introduction
This tutorial will give you a high-level overview of the key concepts in atomate2, diving into the important features of `Job` and `Flow` makers, as well as `InputSets`, `TaskDocuments`, and `Builders`.

## `Job` and `Flow` makers

`Job` and `Flow` makers are the workhorses of the atomate2 code framework. Their key role is to enable the user to orchestrate and execute a sequence of usually repetitive tasks, processes and manage computational workflows.
To ease the management of such processes, tools like [jobflow](https://github.com/materialsproject/jobflow) can be used. The two essential building blocks of the jobflow-based workflows in atomate2 are `Jobs` and `Flows`.

### Basics

A `Job` is a single computing job, and potentially can take any python function form, given that their inputs and outputs (return values) can be serialized in a JSON format. Jobs are defined using the `@job` decorator.

A `Flow` is a sequential collection of job or other flow objects. The connectivity and also execution order and dependency of the different jobs and flow is decided automatically from the job inputs. The output from one job (`job.output`) can be used as the input for the next one, which will therefore establish a connectivity between these two jobs.
The connectivity between several jobs and flows can be arbitrary, depending on the purpose of the workflow. Flows are usually annotated with the `@dataclass` decorator.

The following figure demonstrates a very general example of a flow (Total flow) consisting of several other flows, that each incorporate several individual jobs or tasks, connected by the respective `job.output`.

![Flow example](../_static/example_flow.png)

`Job` and `Flow` makers come in handy by providing a template schema to set up all kinds of electronic structure calculation and computational chemistry tasks (e.g. chemical bonding analysis, elastic constant calculations, force field applications and many more) and to make it easier to handle and unify output from the various supported software packages (like VASP, phonopy and more). <!--is there a list of supported software on the GitHub pages?-->
Because the job output data is stored in a JSON serializable dict format, it makes it possible to conveniently handle it with so-called `TaskDocuments`.<!--hyperref to TaskDoc?-->

### Technical Aspects

The atomate2 `Job` and `Flow` makers are both dataclasses that inherit from the `Maker` [jobflow](https://github.com/materialsproject/jobflow/blob/main/src/jobflow/core/maker.py) dataclass.
The `Maker` class from jobflow is a base class for constructing the aforementioned `Job` and `Flow` objects and has two main functionalities, that are vital for any inheriting job or flow maker: the `make` function and the functionality to update keyword arguments (kwargs).

```
@dataclass
class Maker(MSONable):
    """
    Base maker (factory) class for constructing :obj:`Job` and :obj:`Flow` objects.
    [...]
    """
    def make(...) -> jobflow.Flow | jobflow.Job:
        """Make a job or a flow - must be overridden with a concrete implementation."""
        raise NotImplementedError
    [...]
    def update_kwargs(...):
```

If one needs to implement a new job or flow maker, it is important to pay attention to the functions that raise an `NotImplementedError`. Functions like the `make` function have to be overridden for each specific job or flow maker with its own specific functionalities.

### Examples

An example for a `Job Maker` is the `LobsterMaker`:

```
@dataclass
class LobsterMaker(Maker):
    """
    LOBSTER job maker.
    [...]
    """
    name: str = "lobster"
    [...]

    @job(output_schema=LobsterTaskDocument, data=[CompleteCohp, LobsterCompleteDos])
    def make(
        self,
        wavefunction_dir: str | Path = None,
        basis_dict: dict | None = None,
    ) -> LobsterTaskDocument:
        """
        Run a LOBSTER calculation.
        [...]
        """
```
This class incorporates [LOBSTER](http://cohp.de/) specific input and output data, i.e. the `wavefunction_dir` and `basis_dict` as input in `make` that returns the `LobsterMaker`-class specific output as a `TaskDocument`. Also the `make` functions is annotated by the `@job` decorator, turning this maker into a job maker.
As a job maker, this maker will then create jobs to execute the LOBSTER runs and store the output in the `LobsterTaskDocument` format.

In contrast to a job maker, the `make` function of a `Flow Maker` will return a `Flow` object instead of a task document.
As an example we take the `BasePhononMaker` (that can be used in combination with VASP or the various (machine learned) force fields):
```
@dataclass
class BasePhononMaker(Maker, ABC):
    """
    Maker to calculate harmonic phonons with a DFT/force field code and Phonopy.

    [...]
    """

    name: str = "phonon"
    [...]

    def make(...) -> Flow:
```
This maker will return a flow that provides all the necessary steps and subroutines that are needed to complete the phonon calculations.
Oftentimes, such flows then involve dynamic jobs, as e.g. for the phonon calculations, the number of supercells with individual atomic displacements will be decided upon runtime.
In this particular case, the flow maker `BasePhononMaker` is also inheriting from `ABC` (Abstract Base Classes). <!--more comprehensive explanation on ABCs?-->


# InputSet

An `InputSet` is a convenient way to provide a collection of input data for one or more input files as dict-like container. This makes it feasible to handle the input settings for a variety of computational codes, like e.g. VASP, Q-Chem, LAMMPS, CP2K and ABINIT.

## Basics

The [pymatgen](https://github.com/materialsproject/pymatgen) class `InputSet` is a core class to manage and write the input files for the several computational codes to a file location the user specifies.
There are predefined "recipes" for generating `InputSets` tailored to specific tasks like structural relaxation or the band structure calculation and more, that are provided as `InputGenerator` classes.

## Technical Aspects

The `InputSet` objects posses the `write_input()` method that is used to write all the necessary files.

```
class InputSet(MSONable, MutableMapping):
    """
    Abstract base class for all InputSet classes. InputSet are dict-like
    containers for all calculation input data.
    [...]
    """
    [...]
    def write_input(
        self,
        directory: str | Path,
        make_dir: bool = True,
        overwrite: bool = True,
        zip_inputs: bool = False,
    ):
        """
        Write Inputs to one or more files.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    @classmethod
    def from_directory(cls, directory: str | Path):
        """
        Construct an InputSet from a directory of one or more files.
        [...]
        """
        raise NotImplementedError(f"from_directory has not been implemented in {cls.__name__}")
```

It is important to note that all `InputSet` must implement the `from_directory` classmethod.

## Examples

A nice example for an input set is the `VaspInputSet`:

```
class VaspInputSet(InputSet):
    """
    A class to represent a set of VASP inputs.
    [...]
    """
    [...]

    def write_input(self,..., potcar_spec: bool = False) -> None:
        """
        Write VASP input files to a directory.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    @staticmethod
    def from_directory(...) -> VaspInputSet:
        """
        Load a set of VASP inputs from a directory.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    @property
    def is_valid(self) -> bool:
        """
        Whether the input set is valid.
        [...]
        """
```
VASP needs several inputs files (INCAR, POSCAR, POTCAR and KPOINTS) in order to run, which can be written to a directory using the `write_input` method. If needed, only POTCAR.spec instead of the full POTCAR can be written out, that will only contain the pseudopotential names (e.g. Li_sv).
If necessary, it is also possible to specify optional files. The `VaspInputSet` also provides the possibility to check if the constructed input set is valid, to avoid conflicting input setup (e.g. concerning the ISMEAR and KPOINTS settings).

The corresponding input generator is the `VaspInputGenerator`.

# TaskDocument
A `TaskDocument` (TaskDoc for short) is a dictionary object that contains all the information of the respective computational chemistry calculation run.

## Basics

## Technical Aspects

## Examples

# Builder

The `Builder` object is provided by the [maggma](https://github.com/materialsproject/maggma/) toolkit and serves as a data processing step.

## Basics

`Builders` offer an interface for writing data transformations: getting items from a `Store`, processing and manipulating the input data and preparing an output document, as well as updating and adding the processed items to the target store(s).


## Technical Aspects

The `Builder` and `Store` are the core classes of maggma and give the user tools to build data pipelines from different types of data sources.

```
class Builder(MSONable, metaclass=ABCMeta):
    """
    Base Builder class
    At minimum this class should implement:
    get_items - Get items from the sources
    update_targets - Updates the sources with results

    Multiprocessing and MPI processing can be used if all
    the data processing is  limited to process_items
    """
    [...]

    @abstractmethod
    def get_items(self) -> Iterable:
    [...]

    def process_item(self, item: Any) -> Any:
    [...]

    @abstractmethod
    def update_targets(self, items: List):
    [...]
```
The `Builder` class has three main functionalities that are `get_items` to retrieve data from the source store(s), `process_item` to handle the input items and create an output document to be then added to the target store(s) by `update_target`.

## Examples

An atomate2 `Builder` example is the `ElasticBuilder`:
```
class ElasticBuilder(Builder):
    """
    The elastic builder compiles deformation tasks into an elastic document.
    [...]
    """
    [...]

    def get_items(self) -> Generator:
        """
        Get all items to process into elastic documents.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    def process_item(self, tasks: list[dict]) -> list[ElasticDocument]:
        """
        Process deformation tasks into elasticity documents.
        [...]
        """
        [...]

    def update_targets(self, items: list[ElasticDocument]) -> None:
        """
        Insert new elastic documents into the elasticity store.
        [...]
        """
        [...]
```

In case of the `ElasticBuilder`, the step of getting all the items that shall be processed involves finding all deformation documents with the same formula.
Then during the data and item processing stage, the deformations will be grouped by their parent structures.
Finally, the processed items are compiled into an ElasticDocument from the group of tasks and the new elastic documents are added to the elasticity store.


#TODO exercises?
